 excellent, beautiful ideas back into this absurd hieroglyphic framework in order for their teacher to call it "correct." The teacher then flatters himself that he is somehow sharpening his students' minds.

As a more serious example, let's take the case of a triangle inside a semicircle:

-- DIAGRAM --

Now the beautiful truth about this pattern is that no matter where on the circle you place the tip of the triangle, it always forms a nice right angle. (I have no objection to a term like "right angle" if it is relevant to the problem and makes it easier to discuss. It's not terminology itself that I object to, it's pointless unnecessary terminology. In any case, I would be happy to use "corner" or even "pigpen" if a student preferred.)

-- DIAGRAM --

Here is a case where our intuition is somewhat in doubt. It's not at all clear that this should be true; it even seems unlikely— shouldn't the angle change if I move the tip? What we have here is a fantastic math problem! Is it true? If so, why is it true? What a great project! What a terrific opportunity to exercise one's ingenuity and imagination! Of course no such opportunity is given to the students, whose curiosity and interest is immediately deflated by:  B

THEOREM 9.5. Let ∆ABC be inscribed in a semicircle with diameter AC. Then ∠ABC is a right angle.

Proof:

Statement
1. Draw radius OB. Then OB = OC = OA 
2. m∠OBC = m∠BCA m∠OBA = m∠BAC 
3. m∠ABC = m∠OBA + m∠OBC 
4. m∠ABC + m∠BCA + m∠BAC = 180 
5. m∠ABC + m∠OBC + m∠OBA = 180 
6. 2 m∠ABC = 180 
7. m∠ABC = 90 
8. ∠ABC is a right angle

-- DIAGRAM --

Reason 
1. Given 
2. Isosceles Triangle Theorem
3. Angle Sum Postulate 
4. The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 
5. Substitution (line 2) 
6. Substitution (line 3) 
7. Division Property of Equality 
8. Definition of Right Angle

Could anything be more unattractive and inelegant? Could any argument be more obfuscatory and unreadable? This isn't mathematics! A proof should be an epiphany from the Gods, not a coded message from the Pentagon. This is what comes from a misplaced sense of logical rigor: ugliness. The spirit of the argument has been buried under a heap of confusing formalism.

No mathematician works this way. No mathematician has ever worked this way. This is a complete and utter misunderstanding of the mathematical enterprise. Mathematics is not about erecting barriers between ourselves and our intuition, and making simple things complicated. Mathematics is about removing obstacles to our intuition, and keeping simple things simple.

Compare this unappetizing mess of a proof with the following argument devised by one of my seventh-graders:

> "Take the triangle and rotate it around so it makes a four- sided box inside the circle. Since the triangle got turned completely around, the sides of the box must be parallel, so it makes a parallelogram. But it can't be a slanted box because both of its diagonals are diameters of the circle, so they're equal, which means it must be an actual rectangle. That's why the corner is always a right angle."

-- DIAGRAM --

Isn't that just delightful? And the point isn't whether this argument is any better than the other one as an idea, the point is that the idea comes across. (As a matter of fact, the idea of the first proof is quite pretty, albeit seen as through a glass, darkly.) More importantly, the idea was the student's own. The class had a nice problem to work on, conjectures were made, proofs were attempted, and this is what one student came up with. Of course it took several days, and was the end result of a long sequence of failures.

To be fair, I did paraphrase the proof considerably. The original was quite a bit more convoluted, and contained a lot of unnecessary verbiage (as well as spelling and grammatical errors). But I think I got the feeling of it across. And these defects were all to the good; they gave me something to do as a teacher. I was able to point out several stylistic and logical problems, and the student was then able to improve the argument. For instance, I wasn't completely happy with the bit about both diagonals being diameters— I didn't think that was entirely obvious— but that only meant there was more to think about and more understanding to be gained from the situation. And in fact the student was able to fill in this gap quite nicely:

> "Since the triangle got rotated halfway around the circle, the tip must end up exactly opposite from where it started. That's why the diagonal of the box is a diameter."

So a great project and a beautiful piece of mathematics. I'm not sure who was more proud, the student or myself. This is exactly the kind of experience I want my students to have.

The problem with the standard geometry curriculum is that the private, personal experience of being a struggling artist has virtually been eliminated. The art of proof has been replaced by a rigid step-by step pattern of uninspired formal deductions. The textbook presents a set of definitions, theorems, and proofs, the teacher copies them onto the blackboard, and the students copy them into their notebooks. They are then asked to mimic them in the exercises. Those that catch on to the pattern quickly are the "good" students.

The result is that the student becomes a passive participant in the creative act. Students are making statements to fit a preexisting proof-pattern, not because they mean them. They are being trained to ape arguments, not to intend them. So not only do they have no idea what their teacher is saying, they have no idea what they themselves are saying.

Even the traditional way in which definitions are presented is a lie. In an effort to create an illusion of "clarity" before embarking on the typical cascade of propositions and theorems, a set of definitions are provided so that statements and their proofs can be made as succinct as possible. On the surface this seems fairly innocuous; why not make some abbreviations so that things can be said more economically? The problem is that definitions matter. They come from aesthetic decisions about what distinctions you as an artist consider important. And they are problem-generated. To make a definition is to highlight and call attention to a feature or structural property. Historically this comes out of working on a problem, not as a prelude to it.

The point is you don't start with definitions, you start with problems. Nobody ever had an idea of a number being "irrational" until Pythagoras attempted to measure the diagonal of a square and discovered that it could not be represented as a fraction. Definitions make sense when a point is reached in your argument which makes the distinction necessary. To make definitions without motivation is more likely to cause confusion.

This is yet another example of the way that students are shielded and excluded from the mathematical process. Students need to be able to make their own definitions as the need arises— to frame the debate themselves. I don't want students saying, "the definition, the theorem, the proof," I want them saying, "my definition, my theorem, my proof."

All of these complaints aside, the real problem with this kind of presentation is that it is boring. Efficiency and economy simply do not make good pedagogy. I have a hard time believing that Euclid would approve of this; I know Archimedes wouldn't. SIMPLICIO: Now hold on a minute. I don't know about you, but I actually enjoyed my high school geometry class. I liked the structure, and I enjoyed working within the rigid proof format.

SALVIATI:

I'm sure you did. You probably even got to work on some nice problems occasionally. Lot's of people enjoy geometry class (although lots more hate it). But this is not a point in favor of the current regime. Rather, it is powerful testimony to the allure of mathematics itself. It's hard to completely ruin something so beautiful; even this faint shadow of mathematics can still be engaging and satisfying. Many people enjoy paint-by-numbers as well; it is a relaxing and colorful manual activity. That doesn't make it the real thing, though.

SIMPLICIO: But I'm telling you, I liked it.

SALVIATI: And if you had had a more natural mathematical experience you would have liked it even more.

SIMPLICIO: So we're supposed to just set off on some free-form mathematical excursion, and the students will learn whatever they happen to learn?

SALVIATI:

Precisely. Problems will lead to other problems, technique will be developed as it becomes necessary, and new topics will arise naturally. And if some issue never happens to come up in thirteen years of schooling, how interesting or important could it be?

SIMPLICIO: You've gone completely mad.

SALVIATI:

Perhaps I have. But even working within the conventional framework a good teacher can guide the discussion and the flow of problems so as to allow the students to discover and invent mathematics for themselves. The real problem is that the bureaucracy does not allow an individual teacher to do that. With a set curriculum to follow, a teacher cannot lead. There should be no standards, and no curriculum. Just individuals doing what they think best for their students.

SIMPLICIO: But then how can schools guarantee that their students will all have the same basic knowledge? How will we accurately measure their relative worth?

SALVIATI:

They can't, and we won't. Just like in real life. Ultimately you have to face the fact that people are all different, and that's just fine. In any case, there's no urgency. So a person graduates from high school not knowing the half-angle formulas (as if they do now!) So what? At least that person would come away with some sort of an idea of what the subject is really about, and would get to see something beautiful.

In Conclusion… 

To put the finishing touches on my critique of the standard curriculum, and as a service to the community, I now present the first ever completely honest course catalog for K-12 mathematics:

## The Standard School Mathematics Curriculum

LOWER SCHOOL MATH.
The indoctrination begins. Students learn that mathematics is not something you do, but something that is done to you. Emphasis is placed on sitting still, filling out worksheets, and following directions. Children are expected to master a complex set of algorithms for manipulating Hindi symbols, unrelated to any real desire or curiosity on their part, and regarded only a few centuries ago as too difficult for the average adult. Multiplication tables are stressed, as are parents, teachers, and the kids themselves.

MIDDLE SCHOOL MATH.
Students are taught to view mathematics as a set of procedures, akin to religious rites, which are eternal and set in stone. The holy tablets, or "Math Books," are handed out, and the students learn to address the church elders as "they" (as in "What do they want here? Do they want me to divide?") Contrived and artificial "word problems" will be introduced in order to make the mindless drudgery of arithmetic seem enjoyable by comparison. Students will be tested on a wide array of unnecessary technical terms, such as ‘whole number' and ‘proper fraction,' without the slightest rationale for making such distinctions. Excellent preparation for Algebra I.

ALGEBRA I.
So as not to waste valuable time thinking about numbers and their patterns, this course instead focuses on symbols and rules for their manipulation. The smooth narrative thread that leads from ancient Mesopotamian tablet problems to the high art of the Renaissance algebraists is discarded in favor of a disturbingly fractured, post-modern retelling with no characters, plot, or theme. The insistence that all numbers and expressions be put into various standard forms will provide additional confusion as to the meaning of identity and equality. Students must also memorize the quadratic formula for some reason.

GEOMETRY.
Isolated from the rest of the curriculum, this course will raise the hopes of students who wish to engage in meaningful mathematical activity, and then dash them. Clumsy and distracting notation will be introduced, and no pains will be spared to make the simple seem complicated. This goal of this course is to eradicate any last remaining vestiges of natural mathematical intuition, in preparation for Algebra II.

ALGEBRA II.
The subject of this course is the unmotivated and inappropriate use of coordinate geometry. Conic sections are introduced in a coordinate framework so as to avoid the aesthetic simplicity of cones and their sections. Students will learn to rewrite quadratic forms in a variety of standard formats for no reason whatsoever. Exponential and logarithmic functions are also introduced in Algebra II, despite not being algebraic objects, simply because they have to be stuck in somewhere, apparently. The name of the course is chosen to reinforce the ladder mythology. Why Geometry occurs in between Algebra I and its sequel remains a mystery. TRIGONOMETRY. Two weeks of content are stretched to semester length by masturbatory definitional runarounds. Truly interesting and beautiful phenomena, such as the way the sides of a triangle depend on its angles, will be given the same emphasis as irrelevant abbreviations and obsolete notational conventions, in order to prevent students from forming any clear idea as to what the subject is about. Students will learn such mnemonic devices as "SohCahToa" and "All Students Take Calculus" in lieu of developing a natural intuitive feeling for orientation and symmetry. The measurement of triangles will be discussed without mention of the transcendental nature of the trigonometric functions, or the consequent linguistic and philosophical problems inherent in making such measurements. Calculator required, so as to further blur these issues.

PRE-CALCULUS.
A senseless bouillabaisse of disconnected topics. Mostly a half-baked attempt to introduce late nineteenth-century analytic methods into settings where they are neither necessary nor helpful. Technical definitions of ‘limits' and ‘continuity' are presented in order to obscure the intuitively clear notion of smooth change. As the name suggests, this course prepares the student for Calculus, where the final phase in the systematic obfuscation of any natural ideas related to shape and motion will be completed.

CALCULUS.
This course will explore the mathematics of motion, and the best ways to bury it under a mountain of unnecessary formalism. Despite being an introduction to both the differential and integral calculus, the simple and profound ideas of Newton and Leibniz will be discarded in favor of the more sophisticated function-based approach developed as a response to various analytic crises which do not really apply in this setting, and which will of course not be mentioned. To be taken again in college, verbatim.

***

And there you have it. A complete prescription for permanently disabling young minds— a proven cure for curiosity. What have they done to mathematics!

There is such breathtaking depth and heartbreaking beauty in this ancient art form. How ironic that people dismiss mathematics as the antithesis of creativity. They are missing out on an art form older than any book, more profound than any poem, and more abstract than a